New guides page for circuit cutting addon (#2558)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting.mdx

---

> title: Circuit Cutting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Circuit cutting
```

description: Overview of the addon for circuit cutting to build utility-scale workloads
---

# Circuit cutting

> Circuit cutting is a technique to increase the size of circuits we can run on quantum hardware at the cost of an additional sampling overhead This package implements this technique; where a handful of gates and/or wires are cut, resulting in smaller circuits that are better suited for execution on hardware. These smaller circuits are then executed and the results of the original circuit are reconstructed through using classical post-processing. However, the trade-off is that the overall number of shots must increase by a factor exponential in the number of cuts made. Circuit cutting can also be used to engineer gates between distant qubits which would otherwise require a large swap overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Circuit cutting is a technique to increase the size of circuits that can run on quantum hardware, at the cost of an additional sampling overhead. This addon implements this technique, in which a handful of gates, wires, or both are cut, resulting in smaller circuits that are better suited for execution on hardware. These smaller circuits are then executed, and the results of the original circuit are reconstructed through classical post-processing. However, the trade-off is that the overall number of shots must increase by a factor exponential in the number of cuts made. Circuit cutting can also be used to engineer gates between distant qubits which would otherwise require a large swap overhead.
```

Reviewer: I'm having trouble understanding this sentence - can you make it clearer? 

> However, the trade-off is that the overall number of shots must increase by a factor exponential in the number of cuts made.

Author: Just changed up how that sentence reads. Let me know if it's clearer now!

Reviewer: Yes - thanks, clear now! 🕺

> ### Key terms
> 
> - **subcircuits**: The set of circuits resulting from cutting gates in a `QuantumCircuit` and then separating the disconnected qubit subsets into smaller circuits. These circuits contain [`SingleQubitQPDGate`s](../api/qiskit-addon-cutting/qpd-single-qubit-qpd-gate) and are used to instantiate each subexperiment.
> 
> - **subexperiment**: A term used to describe the unique circuit samples associated with a subcircuit which are sent to a QPU for execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Important terms

- **subcircuits**: The set of circuits resulting from cutting gates in a `QuantumCircuit` and then separating the disconnected qubit subsets into smaller circuits. These circuits contain [`SingleQubitQPDGate`s](/api/qiskit-addon-cutting/qpd-single-qubit-qpd-gate) and are used to instantiate each subexperiment.

- **subexperiment**: A term used to describe the unique circuit samples associated with a subcircuit, which are sent to a QPU for execution.
```

## Install the circuit cutting package

There are three ways to install the circuit cutting package: PyPI, building from source, and running within a containerized environment. It is recommended to install these packages in a [virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3.10/tutorial/venv.html) to ensure separation between package dependencies.

### Install from PyPI

> The most straightforward way to install the `qiskit-addon-cutting` package is via PyPI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most straightforward way to install the `qiskit-addon-cutting` package is with PyPI:
```

```bash
pip install qiskit-addon-cutting
```

### Install from source

<details>
<summary>
Click here to read how to install this package manually.
</summary>

> If you wish to contribute to this package or want to install it manually, first clone the repository:
> 
> ```bash
> git clone git@github.com:Qiskit/qiskit-addon-cutting.git
> ```
> and install the package via `pip`. If you plan on running the tutorials found in the package repository, install the notebook dependencies as well. If you plan on developing in the repository, you may also want to install the `dev` dependencies.
> ```bash
> pip install tox notebook -e '.[notebook-dependencies,dev]'
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To contribute to this package or to install it manually, first clone the repository:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:Qiskit/qiskit-addon-cutting.git
```
and install the package with `pip`. To run the tutorials found in the package repository, install the notebook dependencies as well. Install the `dev` dependencies if you plan on developing in the repository.

```bash
pip install tox notebook -e '.[notebook-dependencies,dev]'
```
```

</details>

### Use within Docker

> A dockerfile is included in the addon repository which can be used to build a docker image. There is also a `compose.yaml` file which allows you to use the Docker image with the following commands
> 
> <details>
> <summary>
> Click here to read how to use this package within Docker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dockerfile included in the addon repository can be used to build a Docker image. There is also a `compose.yaml` file that allows you to use the Docker image with the following commands.

<details>
<summary>
Click here to read how to use this package within Docker.
```

cd qiskit-addon-cutting
docker compose build
docker compose up
```
<Admonition type="note" title="Note">
    If you are using `podman` and `podman-compose` instead of `docker`, the commands are:
    ```bash
    podman machine start
    podman-compose --podman-pull-args short-name-mode="permissive" build
    podman-compose up
    ```
</Admonition>

Once the container is running, you should see a message similar to:
```
notebook_1  |     To access the server, open this file in a browser:
notebook_1  |         file:///home/$USERNAME/.local/share/jupyter/runtime/jpserver-7-open.html
notebook_1  |     Or copy and paste one of these URLs:
notebook_1  |         http://e4a04564eb39:8888/lab?token=00ed70b5342f79f0a970ee9821c271eeffaf760a7dcd36ec
notebook_1  |      or http://127.0.0.1:8888/lab?token=00ed70b5342f79f0a970ee9821c271eeffaf760a7dcd36ec
```

The *last* URL in this message will give you access to the Jupyter notebook interface. 

Additionally, the home directory includes a subdirectory named persistent-volume. All work you would like to save should be placed in this directory, as it is the only one that will be saved across different container runs.

</details>

> ## Theoretical Background

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Theoretical background
```

> In the process of circuit cutting, there are two types of cuts: a **gate** or "space-like" cut where a cut goes through a gate operating on two (or more) qubits, and a **wire** or "time-like" cut which cut directly through a qubit wire (essentially a single-qubit identity gate that has been cut into two pieces). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the circuit cutting process, there are two types of cuts: a **gate** or "space-like" cut, where a cut goes through a gate operating on two (or more) qubits, and a **wire** or "time-like" cut, which cuts directly through a qubit wire (essentially a single-qubit identity gate that has been cut into two pieces). 
```

---
title: Circuit cutting
description: Overview of the addon for circuit cutting to build utility-scale workloads
---

# Circuit cutting

Circuit cutting is a technique to increase the size of circuits that can run on quantum hardware, at the cost of an additional sampling overhead. This addon implements this technique, in which a handful of gates, wires, or both are cut, resulting in smaller circuits that are better suited for execution on hardware. These smaller circuits are then executed, and the results of the original circuit are reconstructed through classical post-processing. However, the trade-off is that the overall number of shots must increase by a factor that is dependent on the number and type of cuts made (known as the sampling overhead). Circuit cutting can also be used to engineer gates between distant qubits which would otherwise require a large swap overhead.

### Important terms

> - **subcircuits**: The set of circuits resulting from cutting gates in a `QuantumCircuit` and then separating the disconnected qubit subsets into smaller circuits. These circuits contain [`SingleQubitQPDGate`s](/api/qiskit-addon-cutting/qpd-single-qubit-qpd-gate) and are used to instantiate each subexperiment.
> 
> - **subexperiment**: A term used to describe the unique circuit samples associated with a subcircuit, which are sent to a QPU for execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Subcircuits**: The set of circuits resulting from cutting gates in a `QuantumCircuit` and then separating the disconnected qubit subsets into smaller circuits. These circuits contain [`SingleQubitQPDGate`s](/api/qiskit-addon-cutting/qpd-single-qubit-qpd-gate) and are used to instantiate each subexperiment.

- **Subexperiment**: A term used to describe the unique circuit samples associated with a subcircuit, which are sent to a QPU for execution.
```

## Install the circuit cutting package

There are three ways to install the circuit cutting package: PyPI, building from source, and running within a containerized environment. It is recommended to install these packages in a [virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3.10/tutorial/venv.html) to ensure separation between package dependencies.

### Install from PyPI

The most straightforward way to install the `qiskit-addon-cutting` package is with PyPI:
```bash
pip install qiskit-addon-cutting
```

### Install from source

<details>
<summary>
Click here to read how to install this package manually.
</summary>

To contribute to this package or to install it manually, first clone the repository:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:Qiskit/qiskit-addon-cutting.git
```
and install the package with `pip`. To run the tutorials found in the package repository, install the notebook dependencies as well. Install the `dev` dependencies if you plan on developing in the repository.
```bash
pip install tox notebook -e '.[notebook-dependencies,dev]'
```

</details>

### Use within Docker

> The dockerfile included in the addon repository can be used to build a Docker image. There is also a `compose.yaml` file that allows you to use the Docker image with the following commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dockerfile included in the addon repository can be used to build a Docker image. The included `compose.yaml` file allows you to use the Docker image with the following commands.
```

</details>

## Theoretical background

In the circuit cutting process, there are two types of cuts: a **gate** or "space-like" cut, where a cut goes through a gate operating on two (or more) qubits, and a **wire** or "time-like" cut, which cuts directly through a qubit wire (essentially a single-qubit identity gate that has been cut into two pieces).

![Diagram of circuit cutting by taking one larger circuit and cutting it into two smaller ones](/images/guides/qiskit-addons/circuit-cutting-diagram.avif)

There are also three scenarios to consider when preparing a circuit cutting workflow; which center around the availability of classical communication between the circuit executions. The first is where only local operations (LO) are available while the other two introduce classical communication between executions known as local operations and classical communication (LOCC). The LOCC scenarios are then grouped into either near-time, one-directional communication between circuit executions or real-time, bi-directional communication (which you might see in a multi-QPU environment).

> While circuit cutting can be used to execute quantum circuits larger than what is possible on currently available hardware, it does come at a cost. Because the technique can be framed as a quasiprobability decomposition (QPD) problem, there is an exponential sampling overhead required in order to reconstruct the results. This overhead is the factor by which the overall number of shots must increase in order for the quasiprobability decomposition to result in the same amount of error, $\epsilon$, as you would get by executing the original circuit. Each cut gate contributes to this overhead and the amount of overhead added is dependent on the type of gate that was cut (more details on the overhead sampling can be found in final appendix of [[1]](#references)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While circuit cutting can be used to execute quantum circuits larger than what is possible on currently available hardware, it does come at a cost. Because the technique can be framed as a quasi-probability decomposition (QPD) problem, there is an exponential sampling overhead required in order to reconstruct the results. This overhead is the factor by which the overall number of shots must increase in order for the quasi-probability decomposition to result in the same amount of error, $\epsilon$, as you would get by executing the original circuit. Each cut gate contributes to this overhead, and the amount of overhead added depends on the type of gate that was cut (more details on the overhead sampling can be found in final appendix of [[1]](#references)).
```

For example, a single cut CNOT gate incurs a sampling overhead of 9 [[2,6]](#references) and a circuit with $n$ wire cuts incurs a sampling overhead of $\mathcal{O}(16^n)$ when classical communication is not available (the LO scenario). This is reduced to $\mathcal{O}(4^n)$ when classical communication becomes available (LOCC scenario) [[4]](#references). However, wire cutting with classical communication (LOCC) is not yet supported by this package.

Formally, the QPD problem of circuit cutting can be expressed as follows:

$$ \mathcal{U} = \sum_i a_i \mathcal{F}_i,$$

where $\mathcal{U}$ is the quantum channel implementing the desired operation, and each $a_i$ is a real coefficient corresponding to a channel, $\mathcal{F}_i$, that is executable on hardware.

The results equivalent to the desired channel $\mathcal{U}$ are obtained by first generating the coefficients, $a_i$, then executing subexperiments to obtain the outcomes of the different channels $\mathcal{F}_i$ in order to reconstruct the expectation values corresponding to $\mathcal{U}$.

### A short example: cutting a RZZGate

> As a basic explicit example, let's consider the decomposition of a cut RZZGate (all the details can be found in [[2]](#references)). A quantum circuit which contains an RZZGate can be simulated by performing six subexperiments where the RZZGate has been replaced with only single-qubit operations (these are the $\mathcal{F}_i$'s from the equation above). The results of this circuit are reconstructed by combining the results of each subexperiment alongside a set of coefficients (the $a_i$'s from the equation above) which can be either positive or negative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a basic explicit example, consider the decomposition of a cut RZZGate (details can be found in [[2]](#references)). A quantum circuit that contains an RZZGate can be simulated by performing six subexperiments where the RZZGate has been replaced with only single-qubit operations (these are the $\mathcal{F}_i$'s from the equation above). The results of this circuit are reconstructed by combining the results of each subexperiment alongside a set of coefficients (the $a_i$'s from the equation above), which can be either positive or negative.
```

For some chosen $\theta$ parameter for the RZZGate, the six subexperiments are as follows:
1. With coefficient $a_1 = \cos^2(\theta/2)$, do nothing ($I\otimes I$)
1. With coefficient $a_2 = \sin^2(\theta/2)$, perform a ZGate on each qubit ($Z\otimes Z$)
1. With coefficient $a_3 = -\sin(\theta)/2$, perform a projective measurement in the $Z$ basis on the first qubit and an $S$ on the second ($M_z\otimes S^\dagger$). If the result of the measurement is $1$, flip the sign of that outcome's contribution during reconstruction.
1. With coefficient $a_4 = \sin(\theta)/2$, perform a projective measurement in the $Z$ basis on the first qubit and an $S^\dagger$ on the second ($M_z\otimes S^\dagger$). If the result of the measurement is 1, flip the sign of that outcome's contribution during reconstruction.
1. Same as 3. ($a_5=a_3$), but swap the qubits (perform $S\otimes M_z$ instead).
1. Same as 4. ($a_6=a_4$), but swap the qubits (perform $S^\dagger\otimes M_z$ instead).

### Sampling overhead reference table

> The below table provides the sampling overhead factor for a variety of two-qubit instructions, provided that only a single instruction is cut.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table provides the sampling overhead factor for a variety of two-qubit instructions, provided that only a single instruction is cut.
```

| Instructions | KAK decomposition angles | Sampling overhead factor |
| --- | --- | --- |
| CSGate, CSdgGate, CSXGate | $\left(\pi/8, 0, 0\right)$ | $3+2\sqrt(2) \approx 2.828$ |
| CXGate, CYGate, CZGate, GHGate, ECRGate | $\left(\pi/4, 0, 0\right)$ | $3^2=9$ |
| iSwapGate, DCXGate | $\left(\pi/4, \pi/4, 0\right)$ | $7^2 = 49$ |
| SwapGate | $\left(\pi/4, \pi/4, \pi/4\right)$ | $7^2 = 49$ |
| RXXGate, RYYGate, RZZGate, RZXGate | $\left(\lvert\theta/2\rvert, 0, 0, \right)$ | $\left(1 + 2\lvert\sin(\theta)\rvert\right)^2$ |
| CRXGate, CRYGate, CRZGate, CPhaseGate | $\left(\lvert\theta/4\rvert, 0, 0\right)$ |  $\left(1 + 2\lvert\sin(\theta/2)\rvert\right)^2$ |
| XXPlusYYGate, XXMinusYYGate | $\left(\vert\theta/4\rvert, \lvert\theta/4\rvert, 0\right)$ | $\left(1 + 4\lvert\sin(\theta/2)\rvert + 2\sin^2(\theta/2)\right)^2$ (independent of $\beta$) |
| Move (cut wire in the LO scenario) | N/A | $4^2 = 16$ |

## Next steps

<Admonition type="tip" title="Recommendations"> 

>     - Read through the page on [getting started with circuit cutting using wire cuts](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-wires)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Read the [Get started with circuit cutting using wire cuts](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-wires) guide.
```

---
title: Circuit cutting
description: Overview of the addon for circuit cutting to build utility-scale workloads
---

# Circuit cutting

> Circuit cutting is a technique to increase the size of circuits that can run on quantum hardware, at the cost of an additional sampling overhead. This addon implements this technique, in which a handful of gates, wires, or both are cut, resulting in smaller circuits that are better suited for execution on hardware. These smaller circuits are then executed, and the results of the original circuit are reconstructed through classical post-processing. However, the trade-off is that the overall number of shots must increase by a factor that is dependent on the number and type of cuts made (known as the sampling overhead). Circuit cutting can also be used to engineer gates between distant qubits which would otherwise require a large swap overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Circuit cutting is a technique to increase the size of circuits that can run on quantum hardware, at the cost of an additional sampling overhead. This addon implements this technique, in which a handful of gates, wires, or both are cut, resulting in smaller circuits that are better suited for execution on hardware. These smaller circuits are then executed, and the results of the original circuit are reconstructed through classical post-processing. However, the trade-off is that the overall number of shots must increase by a factor that is dependent on the number and type of cuts made (known as the sampling overhead). Circuit cutting can also be used to engineer gates between distant qubits which would otherwise require a large SWAP overhead.
```

> ### Important terms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Important terms
```

    ```
</Admonition>

Once the container is running, you should see a message similar to:
```
notebook_1  |     To access the server, open this file in a browser:
notebook_1  |         file:///home/$USERNAME/.local/share/jupyter/runtime/jpserver-7-open.html
notebook_1  |     Or copy and paste one of these URLs:
notebook_1  |         http://e4a04564eb39:8888/lab?token=00ed70b5342f79f0a970ee9821c271eeffaf760a7dcd36ec
notebook_1  |      or http://127.0.0.1:8888/lab?token=00ed70b5342f79f0a970ee9821c271eeffaf760a7dcd36ec
```

The *last* URL in this message will give you access to the Jupyter notebook interface. 

Additionally, the home directory includes a subdirectory named persistent-volume. All work you would like to save should be placed in this directory, as it is the only one that will be saved across different container runs.

</details>

## Theoretical background

In the circuit cutting process, there are two types of cuts: a **gate** or "space-like" cut, where a cut goes through a gate operating on two (or more) qubits, and a **wire** or "time-like" cut, which cuts directly through a qubit wire (essentially a single-qubit identity gate that has been cut into two pieces).

> ![Diagram of circuit cutting by taking one larger circuit and cutting it into two smaller ones](/images/guides/qiskit-addons/circuit-cutting-diagram.avif)

Reviewer: Is the diagram an example of a gate cut or a wire cut?

Reviewer: The key for "A" and "B" listed under the image also isn't explained - I assume they are just the two pieces of the original circuit post-cutting, not sure if they have more significance?

Author: Diagram is a gate cut and the "A" and "B" labels are just to show how the circuit is partitioned when it gets cut. I added a bit more clarity to the alt text.

> ![Diagram of gate cutting by taking one larger circuit and cutting it into two smaller ones labeled "A" and "B"](/images/guides/qiskit-addons/circuit-cutting-diagram.avif)

Reviewer 2: Could we add a figure caption here that indicates this is an example of cutting gates? (that is, 3 entangling gates such that the circuit can be split into two smaller pieces with fewer qubits)

While circuit cutting can be used to execute quantum circuits larger than what is possible on currently available hardware, it does come at a cost. Because the technique can be framed as a quasi-probability decomposition (QPD) problem, there is an exponential sampling overhead required in order to reconstruct the results. This overhead is the factor by which the overall number of shots must increase in order for the quasi-probability decomposition to result in the same amount of error, $\epsilon$, as you would get by executing the original circuit. Each cut gate contributes to this overhead, and the amount of overhead added depends on the type of gate that was cut (more details on the overhead sampling can be found in final appendix of [[1]](#references)).

> For example, a single cut CNOT gate incurs a sampling overhead of 9 [[2,6]](#references) and a circuit with $n$ wire cuts incurs a sampling overhead of $\mathcal{O}(16^n)$ when classical communication is not available (the LO scenario). This is reduced to $\mathcal{O}(4^n)$ when classical communication becomes available (LOCC scenario) [[4]](#references). However, wire cutting with classical communication (LOCC) is not yet supported by this package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, a single cut CNOT gate incurs a sampling overhead of 9 [[2,6]](#references) and a circuit with $n$ wire cuts incurs a sampling overhead of $\mathcal{O}(16^n)$ when classical communication is not available (the LO scenario). This is reduced to $\mathcal{O}(4^n)$ when classical communication becomes available (LOCC scenario) [[4]](#references). However, wire cutting with classical communication (LOCC) is not supported by this package.
```

### Sampling overhead reference table

The following table provides the sampling overhead factor for a variety of two-qubit instructions, provided that only a single instruction is cut.
| Instructions | KAK decomposition angles | Sampling overhead factor |
| --- | --- | --- |
| CSGate, CSdgGate, CSXGate | $\left(\pi/8, 0, 0\right)$ | $3+2\sqrt(2) \approx 2.828$ |
| CXGate, CYGate, CZGate, GHGate, ECRGate | $\left(\pi/4, 0, 0\right)$ | $3^2=9$ |
| iSwapGate, DCXGate | $\left(\pi/4, \pi/4, 0\right)$ | $7^2 = 49$ |
| SwapGate | $\left(\pi/4, \pi/4, \pi/4\right)$ | $7^2 = 49$ |
| RXXGate, RYYGate, RZZGate, RZXGate | $\left(\lvert\theta/2\rvert, 0, 0, \right)$ | $\left(1 + 2\lvert\sin(\theta)\rvert\right)^2$ |
| CRXGate, CRYGate, CRZGate, CPhaseGate | $\left(\lvert\theta/4\rvert, 0, 0\right)$ |  $\left(1 + 2\lvert\sin(\theta/2)\rvert\right)^2$ |
| XXPlusYYGate, XXMinusYYGate | $\left(\vert\theta/4\rvert, \lvert\theta/4\rvert, 0\right)$ | $\left(1 + 4\lvert\sin(\theta/2)\rvert + 2\sin^2(\theta/2)\right)^2$ (independent of $\beta$) |
| Move (cut wire in the LO scenario) | N/A | $4^2 = 16$ |

## Next steps

<Admonition type="tip" title="Recommendations"> 

>     - [Get started with circuit cutting using wire cuts.](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-wires)
>     - [Get started with circuit cutting using gate cuts.](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-gates)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Get started with circuit cutting using gate cuts.](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-gates)
    - [Get started with circuit cutting using wire cuts.](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-wires)
```

>     - [Get started with circuit cutting using gate cuts.](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-gates)

Reviewer 2: Invert the ordering of these two next steps (to match the order in the left nav panel)

>     - Read the [Get started with circuit cutting using wire cuts](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-wires) guide.
>     - Read through the page on [getting started with circuit cutting using gate cuts](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-gates)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Get started with circuit cutting using wire cuts.](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-wires)
    - [Get started with circuit cutting using gate cuts.](/guides/qiskit-addons-cutting-gates)
```
